---
layout: post
title: GPS Time
excerpt: What is GPS time
---

<div style="text-align: justify" markdown="1">
<h3>Definitions</h3>

<h4>GPS Time</h4>

- Zero at 06/01/1980 (UTC Time) 
- written as weeks since 06/01/1980 + seconds in the current week
- Due to the original design GPS week time is stored as 10 bit integers so can only hold 1024 weeks
- If maximum week is reached it rolls over back to 0
- Can also be represented as absolute gps seconds which is just the seconds passed from inception
- Not adjusted for leap seconds
- Expresed with a resolution of 1.5 seconds

<h4>International Atomic Time (TAI) Time</h4>

- Time standard that is specifally for Earth's geoid
- Based on weighted average of 450+ atomic clocks around 80 national labs worldwide
- It's a continuous time scale

<h4>Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) Time</h4>

- Based on TAI + leap seconds
- More in accordance with the earths rotation + suns position due to leap seconds adjustment
- UTC does not have a specific starting point in terms of seconds or a zero point
- Due to various discrepancies that had accumulated over the inception of UTC time, it was decided to start with a 10 seconds offset from TAI time

<h4>Unix / Posix Time</h4>

- Zero at 01/01/1970 (UTC Time)
- No leap seconds (see ***FAQ*** for more info)

<h4>Leap seconds</h4>

- The difference between the observed solar time vs atomic clocks
- Solar times can change due to irregularities in the earth's rotation
- Can only be observed
- Updated every 6 months by IERS (International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service)

<h3>Calculations</h3>

<h4>GPS Aboulte To GPS Week Seconds</h4>

```python
week_no         = floor( gps_absolute / 60 / 60 / 24 / 7 )
seconds_in_week = gps_absolute - week_no * 60 * 60 * 24 * 7
```

<h4>GPS Absolute To Unix Time</h4>

```python
# leap seconds for GPS -> Unix as of 05/07/2024 is 18 seconds
# 10 years + 2 leap year days + 5 gps days
# between 01/01/1970 ~ 06/01/1980 
leap_seconds = 18

t_between_unix_to_gps = 86400 * ((365 * 10) + 2 +  5)
t_between_unix_to_gps = 315964800 

unix_time = t_between_unix_to_gps + gps_absolute - leap_seconds
```

<h4>UTC Time to TAI time</h4>

```python
# leap seconds for UTC -> TAI as of 05/07/2024 is 27 seconds
# UTC has a initial 10 seconds offset
leap_seconds  = 27
inital_offset = 10

tai = utc + initial_offset + leap_seconds
```

<h3>FAQ</h3>
How does an atomic clock work?

- Without going into too much detail it works by observing the frequency between two energy states of atoms.
- 1 second is defined as 9,192,631,770 transitions between two states of caesium-133 atom.


Why is GPS week time represented in weeks + weeks in the second?

- Essentially to compact the message since navigation message to satellites need to be as compact as possible.
- 10 bits for week (2^10 = 1024 weeks) and 19 bits (2^19 = 524288 seconds) for seconds in a week 
(60 (seconds) * 60 (minutes) * 24 (hours) * 7 (days) / 1.5 (interval))
- Smaller than 32 bits (2^32 = 4294967296 seconds \| 139 years) needed for seconds.

Why are we subtracting 18 seconds from the GPS absolute to Unix time conversion when both times don't take into account leap seconds?

- While Unix time does not take into account leap seconds and every single day contains exactly 86,400 seconds it does deal with it by jumping back by 1 in the next day as highlighted by the bolded time in the table below.

| UTC Time | Unix Time | GPS Time |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 1998-12-31T23:59:59.75 | 915148799.75 |  599184011.75 |
| 1998-12-31T23:59:60.00 | 915148800.00 | 599184012.00 |
| 1998-12-31T23:59:60.25 | 915148800.25 | 599184012.25 |
| 1998-12-31T23:59:60.50 | 915148800.50 | 599184012.50 |
| 1998-12-31T23:59:60.75 | 915148800.75 | 599184012.75 |
| 1999-01-01T00:00:00.00 | **915148800.00** | 599184013.00 |
| 1999-01-01T00:00:00.25 | 915148800.25 | 599184013.25 |

</div>
